State machine for CC (#4055)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

decrease to as a response to loss, ECN-CE, or persistent congestion.
The RECOMMENDED value is 2 * max_datagram_size.

## Congestion Control States

The congestion controller has three distinct states, as shown in
{{fig-cc-fsm}}.

~~~

>                  Start or         +------------+
>             persistent congestion |   Slow     |
>         (O)---------------------->|   Start    |
>                                   +------------+
>                                         |
>                                 Loss or |
>                         ECN-CE increase |
>                                         v

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            Start                 +------------+
             (O)----------------->|   Slow     |
       +------------------------->|   Start    |
       |                          +------------+
       | Persistent                     |
       | congestion             Loss or |
       |                ECN-CE increase |
       |                                v
```

It's probably worth calling persistent congestion out as a separate transition rather than a restart.  Though it's more complex than that, since I believe persistent congestion is also checked only on a loss event.

Reviewer 2: You could enter persistent congestion from any state, so this particular transition won't be adequate. You could make draw a parallel box called persistent-congestion on the left to which {Slow Start, Congestion Avoidance, Recovery} can all transition, which would then transition back up to Slow Start.

Author: When you encounter persistent congestion, you reset the state machine.  That is what the text below the figure says.  It's not a new state because then you are in Slow Start again.  I think that is the only sensible solution here.

Reviewer 2: Good point. It's certainly not a new state for the congestion controller; it's an event, much like loss.

 +------------+     Loss or       +------------+
 | Congestion |  ECN-CE increase  |  Recovery  |
 | Avoidance  |------------------>|   Period   |

>  +------------+                   +------------+

Reviewer 3: It would be nice if you drew what happens in Recovery Period in the case of  Loss or ECN-CE increase. In my understanding, Recovery Period continues and both cwin and ssthresh are not changed. I'm not sure if congestion_recovery_start_time is changed.

Author: Nothing happens.  The only real actions occur on entry (and maybe on exit, depending on when you decide to apply the congestion window decrease).  The text and pseudocode capture this; I had trouble fitting anything more into the diagram.

Reviewer 3: OK.

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't this also show how to transition out of recovery?

Reviewer: Looks like that's been added.

           ^                            |
           |                            |
           +----------------------------+
              Acknowledgment of packet
                sent during recovery
~~~
{: #fig-cc-fsm title="Congestion Control States and Transitions"}

These states and the transitions between them are described in subsequent
sections.

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add a note about persistent congestion, since that's not an explicit state in this machine. Maybe something like "Note that a sender can declare persistent congestion in any of these states (see {{persistent-congestion}}), after which it enters slow start.".

### Slow Start

A sender is in slow start any time the congestion window is below the slow
start threshold. A sender begins in slow start because the slow start threshold
is initialized to an infinite value.

While a sender is in slow start, the congestion window increases by the number
of bytes acknowledged when each acknowledgment is processed. This results in
exponential growth of the congestion window.

The sender exits slow start and enters a recovery period when a packet is lost
or when the ECN-CE count reported by its peer increases.

A sender re-enters slow start any time the congestion window is less than the
slow start threshold, which only occurs after persistent congestion is
declared.

### Recovery Period {#recovery-period}

> A sender enters the recovery period when it detects the loss of a packet or the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A sender enters a recovery period when it detects the loss of a packet or the
```

ECN-CE count reported by its peer increases. A sender that is already in a

> recovery period stays in it and does not re-enter it.

Reviewer: Switching between "the"/"a" here.

On entering a recovery period, a sender MUST set the slow start threshold to

> the half the value of the congestion window at the moment that loss is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
half the value of the congestion window at the moment that loss is
```

detected. The congestion window MUST be set to the reduced value of the slow
start threshold before exiting the recovery period. Implementations MAY set the
congestion window immediately on entering a recovery period or use other
mechanisms, such as Proportional Rate Reduction ({{?PRR=RFC6937}}), to reduce
it more gradually.

The recovery period aims to limit congestion window reduction to once per round

> trip. Therefore during a recovery period, the congestion window remains does

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
trip. Therefore during a recovery period, the congestion window does
```

not change in response to new losses or increases in the ECN-CE count.

A recovery period ends and the sender enters congestion avoidance when a packet

> sent during the recovery period is acknowledged. This is slightly different
> from TCP's definition of recovery, which ends when the lost packet that started
> recovery is acknowledged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sent during the recovery period is acknowledged. This is slightly different
from TCP's definition of recovery, which ends when the lost segment that started
recovery is acknowledged ({{?RFC5681}}).
```

slow start threshold. A sender begins in slow start because the slow start
threshold is initialized to an infinite value.

While a sender is in slow start, the congestion window increases by the number
of bytes acknowledged when each acknowledgment is processed. This results in
exponential growth of the congestion window.

The sender MUST exit slow start and enter a recovery period when a packet is
lost or when the ECN-CE count reported by its peer increases.

A sender re-enters slow start any time the congestion window is less than the
slow start threshold, which only occurs after persistent congestion is
declared.

### Recovery {#recovery-period}

A NewReno sender enters a recovery period when it detects the loss of a packet
or the ECN-CE count reported by its peer increases. A sender that is already in
a recovery period stays in it and does not re-enter it.

On entering a recovery period, a sender MUST set the slow start threshold to
half the value of the congestion window when loss is detected. The congestion
window MUST be set to the reduced value of the slow start threshold before
exiting the recovery period.

> Implementations MAY set the congestion window immediately upon entering a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Implementations MAY reduce the congestion window immediately upon entering a
```

recovery period or use other mechanisms, such as Proportional Rate Reduction
({{?PRR=RFC6937}}), to reduce the congestion window more gradually. If the
congestion window is reduced immediately, a single packet can be sent prior to
reduction. This speeds up loss recovery if the data in the lost packet is
retransmitted and is similar to TCP as described in Section 5 of {{?RFC6675}}.

The recovery period aims to limit congestion window reduction to once per round
trip. Therefore during a recovery period, the congestion window does not change
in response to new losses or increases in the ECN-CE count.

A recovery period ends and the sender enters congestion avoidance when a packet
sent during the recovery period is acknowledged. This is slightly different
from TCP's definition of recovery, which ends when the lost segment that
started recovery is acknowledged ({{?RFC5681}}).

### Congestion Avoidance

> A NewReno sender is in congestion avoidance any time the congestion window is

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A sender is in congestion avoidance any time the congestion window is
```

Reviewer 2: This is specific to NewReno, so I would leave this as it is.

Reviewer 4: How is this specific to NewReno? It's the definition of the ssthresh that you are in slow start when your cwnd is below that value.

Reviewer 2: It's specific to a sender that uses slow start with an ssthresh variable. BBR does not have an ssthresh, for example. Since we're only defining NewReno in this document, there isn't anything incorrect with saying "NewReno sender", though it might be slightly more specific than you might like.

at or above the slow start threshold and not in a recovery period.

> A sender in congestion avoidance uses an Additive Increase Multiplicative

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A NewReno sender in congestion avoidance uses an Additive Increase Multiplicative
```

decrease to as a response to loss, ECN-CE, or persistent congestion.
The RECOMMENDED value is 2 * max_datagram_size.

## Congestion Control States

The congestion controller has three distinct states, as shown in
{{fig-cc-fsm}}.

~~~

>                  Start or         +------------+

Reviewer 5: Start seems odd to me, maybe "New Path"?

```suggestion
                 New Path or         +------------+
```

                                  +------------+
                                        |
                                Loss or |
                        ECN-CE increase |
                                        v
 +------------+     Loss or       +------------+
 | Congestion |  ECN-CE increase  |  Recovery  |
 | Avoidance  |------------------>|   Period   |
 +------------+                   +------------+
           ^                            |
           |                            |
           +----------------------------+
              Acknowledgment of packet
                sent during recovery
~~~
{: #fig-cc-fsm title="Congestion Control States and Transitions"}

These states and the transitions between them are described in subsequent
sections.

### Slow Start

A NewReno sender is in slow start any time the congestion window is below the
slow start threshold. A sender begins in slow start because the slow start
threshold is initialized to an infinite value.

While a sender is in slow start, the congestion window increases by the number
of bytes acknowledged when each acknowledgment is processed. This results in
exponential growth of the congestion window.

> The sender exits slow start and enters a recovery period when a packet is lost

Reviewer 5: I think we need to keep the MUST?

```suggestion
The sender MUST exit slow start and enter a recovery period when a packet is lost
```

or when the ECN-CE count reported by its peer increases.

A sender re-enters slow start any time the congestion window is less than the
slow start threshold, which only occurs after persistent congestion is
declared.

> ### Recovery Period {#recovery-period}

Reviewer 5: I think this should be "Recovery", not recovery period, since "Recovery" is a state, just like Slow Start is a state.  When we only referred to recovery period in a few spots, it seemed ok, but I've always heard the phrase "enter recovery", never "enters a recovery period".

A NewReno sender enters a recovery period when it detects the loss of a
packet or the ECN-CE count reported by its peer increases. A sender that is
already in a recovery period stays in it and does not re-enter it.

On entering a recovery period, a sender MUST set the slow start threshold to

> half the value of the congestion window at the moment that loss is

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
half the value of the congestion window when loss is
```

detected. The congestion window MUST be set to the reduced value of the slow

> start threshold before exiting the recovery period. Implementations MAY set the

Reviewer 5: I prefer the organization the existing text for this paragraph, and starting the new paragraph with "Implementations MAY..."

Author: Just a consequence of many iterations of merging and rebasing.  Fixed.

## On New Congestion Event

Invoked from ProcessECN and OnPacketsLost when a new congestion event is
detected. If not in a recovery period, this starts a recovery period and
reduces the slow start threshold and congestion window immediately.

~~~
OnCongestionEvent(sent_time):

>   // No reaction when recovery period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // No reaction if already in a recovery period.
```

## On New Congestion Event

Invoked from ProcessECN and OnPacketsLost when a new congestion event is

> detected. If not in a recovery period, this starts a recovery period and

Reviewer 5: This is a good example of 'recovery' the state vs  the 'recovery period'.

```suggestion
detected. If not already in recovery, this starts a recovery period and
```
